In this lecture, I'm going to show you how backpropagation is implemented in PyTorch.
Now, I'm not going to discuss the math of backprop.
Instead, this is more about how it is mechanistically implemented.
We're going to work with a really simple example that also has an analytic solution.
And by analytic solution I mean that we can actually get the optimal answer without doing any gradient
descent or backprop.
But that's good because that will help us evaluate the performance of our simple model.
So training a model in PyTorch involves the following five steps that are done in a for loop over training
epochs.
Step one is to clear the previous gradients.
This step is necessary because PyTorch actually stores a copy of the gradients inside of its weights.
Variables.
So if you don't clear out the previous gradients, they will just keep summing over and over on top
of each other and the losses will accumulate.
Now, accumulating losses over multiple passes is a computational trick that can be used for training
extremely large models, including llms.
To be honest, I find it unfortunate and annoying that the default behavior is to allow the gradients
to accumulate, because in the overwhelming vast majority of times that you train a model, you actually
want to clear out the gradients and not let them accumulate.
But anyway, this is just how it works.
So that's what we need to do.
We need to zero out the existing gradients.
Step two is to perform a forward pass through the model like I showed in the previous video, and then
calculate the loss, which is the discrepancy between the model output and the target value.
And that's basically just how close is the model's prediction to the real world data label.
Then step three is to calculate the gradient of the loss function at the loss value obtained in step
two.
This is where you're actually calculating the derivative.
Step four is to go through the model and update all of the weights in the model according to the gradient
of the loss function.
So this is the actual backprop.
So steps one through four are the backprop mechanism as they get implemented in PyTorch.
So they're all done by PyTorch functions.
So you are not actually having to implement any of the low level graph calculations.
And finally step five is optional and is whatever else you might want to include in the training loop.
For example, you might want to store the losses in a separate variable for later inspection.
Calculate the norm of the weights matrix or print out some messages about progress during learning.
In a moment, I will switch to Python and show you what this looks like.
But first I'll give you an overview of what you'll see and what to expect and what we're going to do.
We are going to use gradient descent and backprop to optimize this function.
This is our loss function.
Now this does not actually correspond to an actual loss function that's used in deep learning.
It's just some other function that looks good for this demo.
But the idea is that we want to find the value of x that minimizes this equation.
So in other words, what value of x makes this equation be as small as it possibly can be?
That's the goal.
Now this variable x actually corresponds to the weights in a deep learning model.
So if this is the loss function, then the goal of backprop is to find the values of all the weights
in the entire model that make this function be as small as we can get it to be.
Now it turns out that for this particular equation, we do not need gradient descent or any other iterative
algorithm.
I can already tell you that the optimal solution is one third.
So when x equals one third, then this equation is the smallest it can possibly be.
And how do I know that the correct answer is one third?
Well this comes from differential calculus and optimization.
So the derivative of this function is six x minus two.
And then we set that to zero.
Solve for x and that gives us x equals one third.
If you are unfamiliar with differential calculus then don't worry about this I'm just showing how we
can use calculus to derive an analytic solution without having to do gradient descent.
But that's actually very useful in this case, because it allows us to look at how gradient descent
performs when we know what the answer needs to be.
We know the optimal answer.
Here you see a visualization of this problem.
The purple line is the function we're trying to minimize.
And the dotted blue line is the exact solution.
So that certainly is consistent with the visual appearance of this function.
Okay.
So what we are going to do is use PyTorch to find this solution, or at least one close to it using
backprop.
You're going to see a for loop that looks like this.
So here you see each of the five steps that I described a few slides ago.
I'll go through this in more detail in the code.
But you can see that it's fairly straightforward to get backprop to work in PyTorch.
And here in step five, I'm also storing the value of the weight and the actual loss from the model.
And I'm also printing out some model some information as the training continues.
Now the loss trajectory.
We can plot like this.
So you see that the loss goes down as the number of training epochs increases.
Now this is actually the value of the loss function.
So the function this function over here, that is the actual value of the loss that gets plotted over
here.
Nothing super mysterious here.
In fact, we can see that the value of the function starts off at around eight.
And by the end it asymptotes to something a little bit less than three.
I don't know, maybe this is 2.8 or something.
And then we are going to make a plot that's similar to the one in the previous slide, but this one
shows the actual values of the weights as they are being optimized iteratively through backprop.
So the weights started off at around minus one.
And then you can see at each step of backprop each step in this for loop over the training epochs,
we get closer and closer to the exact optimal solution.
I've also changed the colors and the sizes of these circles, so they get smaller and darker as we get
closer to the correct solution.
But you can also see on the loss function.
So the y axis here you can see it starts off at somewhere around eight.
And the optimal solution is x equals one third.
And at x equals one third y equals yeah somewhere a little bit less than three.
And that's basically what we saw over here on this plot.
Of course this stuff is all really nicely visualizable for one variable functions.
Actual deep learning models have millions, billions or even trillions of parameters, so that's just
impossible to visualize.
But the principle and the code implementations are the same anyway.
Now let's explore this more in code.
So import some libraries here.
Here is the optimization function.
You can see I'm implementing this in PyTorch not in numpy.
Okay.
So the idea is that the math function or the loss function is a Python function that we can input values
of.
Here I'm calling it x, but these are the weights in the model.
And the output is going to be the actual loss value.
Okay.
So run that.
And then here I'm just visualizing this.
This is the graph that I showed in the slides.
Now here we created our deep learning model.
This is literally just one weight, so I'm defining it to be a tensor of.
I'm initializing the weight to be minus one.
And here importantly I say requiresgrad equals true.
So this is what signals to PyTorch that the gradients should be calculated and applied to this particular
variable.
That's how PyTorch knows that this is something important that needs to be optimized.
Okay, so here's our super intense deep learning model here.
Exactly one number.
Okay.
Run that.
Um, let's see here I am initializing some training parameters.
We're going to run over 80 training epochs with a learning rate of 0.01.
And here I am creating an optimizer.
And this is what implements the gradient descent according to some algorithm.
In this case it's stochastic gradient descent for large language models, we use the atom W algorithm,
and in other models you would use Rmsprop or Adam, and so on.
Here I'm inputting the weight.
So now PyTorch will know behind the scenes as it is running through stochastic gradient descent.
As it's running through backprop, it is going to know to associate the losses with this, calculate
the gradients and apply it to this parameter from the model.
Again, when you're working with real models, then what you input here is the entire model variable.
So the entire model itself.
But here yeah as I mentioned our entire deep learning model is just this one number here.
All right.
So train the model.
Okay.
Here I'm just initializing the estimate of the local minimum and the losses.
Loop over training.
Uh, clear out the previous gradients.
Compute the forward pass and get the loss.
And here is where I calculate the gradient.
Here is where we update using the optimizer.
And this is the step that actually modifies the weights in the model so far.
These steps are just about calculating the loss and determining the the gradient with respect to the
current value of w or x.
Yeah.
And then here we actually are going through and changing the weights in the model.
Here I'm storing the actual weight value and the loss value.
And here I'm just printing out a progress report so we can see that the weight or sorry the loss started
off as being some large number and it ends up being some smaller number.
Now what these numbers actually want to should be, and what numbers we should be looking for depends
on the loss function.
And it depends on the model.
I will talk later in the course about how to interpret these values in the context of a large language
model.
For now, suffice it to say that this is great.
Okay, so and then we got the minimum found at 0.32.
Let me zoom in here.
Remember that the optimal solution is one third which is 0.33333.
So the gradient descent got us a value of the weight that made the loss function smaller.
But it was not really literally exactly the optimal solution that we know it should be.
Okay, so let me now plot the value of the losses.
Again, this is just literally the value of the loss function starts off at eight.
It goes down to a little bit below three.
And that you see here it starts off at eight.
So when x equals minus one then the loss function is around eight, and then it keeps going down until
we get to around one third on x axis, which has a loss function value of somewhere around three, a
little bit less than three.
Okay, so that's the losses.
Here I am printing out the estimate of the local minimum, which is the value of w.
So you can see that it's around minus one.
And as we go through the 80 training epochs there's 80 numbers in here.
This number increases.
It's getting larger here.
It goes through zero and it's getting bigger and bigger until it gets to close to a third.
It doesn't get to exactly one third.
Now I have a question for you.
Why is it the case that this number here is -0.92?
Whereas this number here when I initialize the model is minus one.
If you'd like to pause the video and think about why there is that discrepancy.
Then feel free to do so.
So the answer is that the model really is initialized to minus one.
But by the time I grab the next version of the model which is here, or the weights, which is here,
we've already gone through and updated the model.
So if you like, if you're curious, you can actually get two versions of this.
You can get, uh, let me see.
You could do something like this.
So you could say and maybe put this in a separate vector like this.
You could do something like this to see how the weight changes before and after the optimization step.
Okay.
Uh.
Let's see.
So where were we?
Oh, yeah.
Okay.
So now what I'm going to do is visualize this as I showed in the slides.
I'm not going to say a whole lot about this.
You can see here is where I define the, uh, changes in the sizes and the colors as we go through training
to get this plot to look.
This is just some aesthetic appearances.
Okay.
Now, what I want to show you is that as soon as we created this model with, uh, as a PyTorch tensor
and with Requiresgrad equals.
True, that activated a lot of other properties in this variable W.
So this is not just a number, it's actually a class all on its own.
There's a lot of information that is associated with this variable W and that we can see here.
We can use dir w to list all of the attributes, all the methods and the properties associated with
W.
And there's a lot there's a lot going on in here.
All sorts of things.
Unsqueeze unique uh tried u for triangular upper and so on.
There's a lot of stuff going on here.
Uh, some of this you will use throughout the course.
Uh, others you don't.
I don't even know what this stands for.
S diem.
I'm sure it is something relevant, but I don't know.
Off the top of my head.
Okay.
But what I do want to show you is w dot grad.
This is the gradient, which is just the derivative value of the loss function with respect to this
value here.
And that value is minus .06.
Now in theory the derivative at the exact analytic solution which is one third the derivative at that
point is exactly zero.
Now here we see that this is not exactly zero.
It's a small number.
It's negative.
And what does that mean?
That means that we haven't really gotten close enough, uh, to the exact optimum.
And the derivative is zero, which you'll remember from the methods of gradient descent, that that
means that the next step needs to be a little bit further to the right.
Right.
We always move in the direction opposite to the sign of the derivative or the gradient.
So this model still needs to move a little bit to the right.
And the fact that this here grad is not exactly zero means that we haven't exactly hit the optimum.
So also if you're curious, you can also extract the actual gradient information here.
So you could do this here instead of or in addition to grabbing the actual value.
I really like working with these small, simple models.
I find the visualization great for understanding the code and building intuition.
Now the models are going to be phantasmagorical, more complicated than what we just did in this demo.
But the basic structure of training a model is the same.